[GAP-25] Golem Certificates structure (#57)
golemfactory/golem-architecture: gaps/gap-25_golem_certificates/gap-25_golem_certificates.md

---
gap: 25
title: Golem Certificates structure
description: Describes certificates usage to enable more sensitive golem features.
author: <Witold Dzięcioł (@nieznanysprawiciel)>
status: Draft
type: Feature
requires: GAP-5, GAP-4
---
## Abstract

> Some Golem features are more sensitive because of potential malicious usage. A good example is outbound network traffic, where malicious user could cause harm if he was able to access any internet resource. In GAP-5 and GAP-4 we decided to limit Requestor abilities by introducing Computational Manifest which defines allowed commands and domains access. Payload Manifest is signed to confirm that image is safe to use.

Reviewer: I'd use a gender-neutral term ;)

```suggestion
Some Golem features are more sensitive because of potential malicious usage. A good example is outbound network traffic, where malicious user could cause harm if they were able to access any internet resource. In GAP-5 and GAP-4 we decided to limit Requestor abilities by introducing Computational Manifest which defines allowed commands and domains access. Payload Manifest is signed to confirm that image is safe to use.
```

> Some Golem features are more sensitive, because of potential malicious usage. A good example is outbound network traffic, where malicious user could cause harm, if he was able to access any internet resource. In GAP-5 and GAP-4 we decided to limit Requestor abilities by introducing Computational Manifest, which defines allowed commands and domains access. Payload Manifest is signed to confirm, that image is safe to use.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some Golem features are more sensitive because of potential malicious usage. A good example is outbound network traffic, where malicious user could cause harm if he was able to access any internet resource. In GAP-5 and GAP-4 we decided to limit Requestor abilities by introducing Computational Manifest which defines allowed commands and domains access. Payload Manifest is signed to confirm that image is safe to use.
```

> Outbound network is not the only use case, which requires certificates. Soon we will have other cases and we need unify certificates usage to allow different sets of permissions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Outbound network is not the only use case which requires certificates. Soon we will have other cases and we need unify certificates usage to allow different sets of permissions.
```

## Motivation

> Golem use cases allowing for interaction with external world (like outbound, inbound network traffic) put `Providers` in danger of malicious behavior from Requestor side. To alleviate this danger, in GAP-5 and GAP-4 we decided to limit Requestor abilities by introducing Computational Manifest which should be signed by trusted party.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Golem use cases allowing for interaction with external world (like outbound, inbound network traffic) put `Providers` in danger of malicious behavior from Requestor side. To alleviate this danger, in GAP-5 and GAP-4 we decided to limit Requestor abilities by introducing Computational Manifest which should be signed by a trusted party.
```

> Golem use cases allowing for interaction with external world (like outbound, inbound network traffic), put `Providers` in danger of malicious behavior from Requestor side. To alleviate this danger, in GAP-5 and GAP-4 we decided to limit Requestor abilities by introducing Computational Manifest, which should be signed by trusted party.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Golem use cases allowing for interaction with external world (like outbound, inbound network traffic) put `Providers` in danger of malicious behavior from Requestor side. To alleviate this danger, in GAP-5 and GAP-4 we decided to limit Requestor abilities by introducing Computational Manifest which should be signed by trusted party.
```

> Currently `Providers` are able to choose certificates, they trust, by adding them to Provider configuration. This means that any party is able to gain `Providers'` trust, distribute their own certificates and validate safety and security of different Payloads. Despite this, we are aware that gaining trust can be difficult, so Golem Factory has to take initiative to be at least initial source of trust in the Network.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Currently `Providers` are able to choose certificates they trust, by adding them to Provider configuration. This means that any party is able to gain `Providers'` trust, distribute their own certificates and validate safety and security of different Payloads. Despite this, we are aware that gaining trust can be difficult, so Golem Factory has to take initiative to be at least initial source of trust in the Network.
```

> Safety and security of Payloads ran on `Providers'` machines can be ensured in few ways:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Safety and security of Payloads run on `Providers'` machines can be ensured in few ways:
```

> Ensuring safety and security of Payloads ran on `Providers'` machines can be ensured in few ways:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Safety and security of Payloads ran on `Providers'` machines can be ensured in few ways:
```

> - Audit of Payload Manifest and VM image, to validate if permissions are low enough for image to be safe

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Audit of the Payload Manifest and of the VM image, to validate if permissions are low enough for image to be safe
```

> - Making audit of Payload Manifest and VM image, to validate if permissions are low enough for image to be safe

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Audit of Payload Manifest and VM image, to validate if permissions are low enough for image to be safe
```

- Signing legal Agreements with partner companies developing software on Golem, in which they commit not to do anything malicious
- Distribute permissions for signing Payloads to external companies taking responsibility for Payloads safety

> When designing certificates structure, that will allow to meet requirements mentioned above, we must keep in mind future use cases, that might require signing with certificates:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When designing certificates structure that will allow to meet requirements mentioned above, we must keep in mind future use cases that might require signing with certificates:
```

- KYC
- Inbound network traffic

> That means, that certificates will be used to sign different kinds of permissions. In case of transferring certification to other companies or signing legal Agreements, we need to ensure, that we keep control, which permissions they will be able to use.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This means that certificates will be used to sign different kinds of permissions. In case of transferring certification to other companies or signing legal Agreements, we need to ensure that we keep control which permissions they will be able to use.
```

> In the future of Golem Network we expect, that new independent features will be implemented by community and they may need to use certification. This document aims to standardize this approach.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the future of Golem Network we expect that new, independent features will be implemented by community and they may need to use certification. This document aims to standardize this approach.
```

## Specification

We decided to use [x509 arbitrary extensions](https://www.openssl.org/docs/man1.1.1/man5/x509v3_config.html) to enrich certificates with custom fields describing permissions.

### Custom OIDs

To use arbitrary extensions we need to apply to https://pen.iana.org/pen/PenApplication.page to assign OID (Private Enterprise Number) for GolemFactory.

> In further documentation I assume we got number `1.3.6.1.4.1.60000`, until we will acquire real OID.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In further documentation I assume we got number `1.3.6.1.4.1.60000`, until we acquire real OID.
```

| GolemFactory               | 1.3.6.1.4.1.60000 (TODO) | Root OID for Golem Factory                                           |
| GolemCertificates          | ${GolemFactory}.1        | Root for Golem certificates parameters                               |
| GolemCertificatesAllowance | ${GolemCertificates}.1   | List of permissions to sign certain Golem features using certificate |

Example values of `GolemCertificatesAllowance` field (this list will be used in further examples, to illustrate how certification works):

| Field             | Semantic                                                                        |
| ----------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| all               | Certificate is allowed to sign any feature (even not existing future use cases) |
| manifest-outbound | Allowed to sign manifests with outbound network enabled                         |
| inbound           | Allowed to sign inbound allowance for Requestors.                               |
| ...               | {List is non-exhaustive - new features will be created in future}               |

> 

Reviewer 2: How do we manage/maintain the list of allowed `GolemCertificatesAllowance` values? This calls for a public, 'official' list, maybe maintained as part of Golem Standards (here: https://github.com/golemfactory/golem-architecture/tree/master/standards ?)

Author: I wrote somewhere, that we will update list in this GAP, but maybe it is good idea to maintain it in standards. But we must take care that we have links to standards everywhere, because sometimes I was having hard time to find something.

### Permissions chains

> To transfer some set of permissions to external entity, Golem Factory has to sign it's certificate. This will create certificates chain, that will be later validated by Agent application. For signature to be valid, both certificate and it's parent has to contain specific allowance (or `all`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To transfer some set of permissions to external entity, Golem Factory has to sign its certificate. This will create certificates chain that will be later validated by Agent application. For signature to be valid, both certificate and its parent has to contain specific allowance (or `all`).
```

For example, if we have hierarchy:

| Certificate           | allowance                 |
| --------------------- | ------------------------- |
| Golem Root            | all                       |
| Golem Intermediate    | manifest-outbound,inbound |
| Partner's certificate | manifest-outbound         |

> than Payload Manifest signature is valid and `Parter's certificate` is allowed to sign Manifests, but has no rights to sign inbound related features.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
then Payload Manifest signature is valid and `Parter's certificate` is allowed to sign Manifests, but has no rights to sign inbound related features.
```

But if structure looks like this:

| Certificate           | allowance         |
| --------------------- | ----------------- |
| Golem Root            | all               |
| Golem Intermediate    | inbound           |
| Partner's certificate | manifest-outbound |

> Than `Parter's certificate` is not allowed to sign manifests and Agent application should reject such Proposals.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
then `Partner's certificate` is not allowed to sign manifests and Agent application should reject such Proposals.
```

> Note that certificates chain is incorrect, because `Partner's certificate` shouldn't be signed by `Golem Intermediate` in the first place.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that the certificate chain is incorrect, because `Partner's certificate` shouldn't be signed by `Golem Intermediate` in the first place.
```

`openssl x509 -text -noout -in rootCA.crt`

Output looks like this:

```
...
        X509v3 extensions:
            1.3.6.1.4.1.60000.1.1: 
                0...all..manifest-outbound
...
```

### Provider Agent changes

Provider agent supports using certificates without `allowance` extensions.
We need following changes:

- Certificates chain permissions validation
- Check outbound allowance during negotiations (currently signature is enough)

No changes on Requestor side are expected.

## Security Considerations

### Old yagna versions

If we don't implement certificates `allowance` before releasing outbound network, Providers could accept Manifest signatures signed by certificates,
that don't have `manifest-outbound` allowance. This doesn't hurt, as long as we don't introduce new sensitive features.

### Private certificates keys management

We need to consider security issues related to storing and using Root Golem Certificate and important intermediate certificates.
We need internal company policies, who has permissions to decide about signing using certain certificates and who has access to them.

### Root Golem certificate

> Root certificate is always self-signed certificate. We could sign it using [Golem Multisig](https://etherscan.io/address/0x7da82c7ab4771ff031b66538d2fb9b0b047f6cf9) contract to allow anyone validate it's authenticity.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Root certificate is always self-signed certificate. We could sign it using [Golem Multisig](https://etherscan.io/address/0x7da82c7ab4771ff031b66538d2fb9b0b047f6cf9) contract to allow anyone validate its authenticity.
```

> Root certificate is always self-signed certificate. We could sign it using [Golem Multisig](https://etherscan.io/address/0x7da82c7ab4771ff031b66538d2fb9b0b047f6cf9) contract to allow anyone validate it's authenticity.

Reviewer 2: I strongly recommend leveraging a well-established public CA as issuer of Golem Root (or in this case - Golem Intermediate) certificates.  
We do not want to be a public CA in full sense, and we don't want to be legally liable for faults in managing the Root CA certs. Buying a Root/Intermediate cert from a public CA delegates risk away from GolemFactory, and will make Golem certificates be more accepted by the users in the "industry" (esp. the enterprise users). 
A concise article to back the above comment can be found here: https://www.thesslstore.com/blog/how-to-become-a-certificate-authority/

Reviewer 3: I agree it is better to delegate reponsibility to some Public CA but it creates a question whether we should not delegate responsibility of keeping Public CA root certificates up to date to user/OS and to just take them from OS? It will also make easier for an app author to distribute their intermediate certificate signed by Public CA because there will be no necessity to import (and prepare) a whole chain.
If we will stick to internal certificate storage using Public CA will make having a proper certificate revocation handling in Provider's keystore an absolute must (there is already a task for it).

Reviewer 3: On second thought I see a problem.
In some way we are turning x509 certificates into an authorization method.
The way we wanted to allow providers to control whom to trust or not was by importing App author's public certificates into provider's keystore. Right now we do not verify whether imported certificate (or chain) meets any criteria, we just check if it is valid and it gets saved inside a keystore. The moment Public CA certs will end up in Provider's keystore any Demand with manifest signed directly by Public CA certificate will get accepted. Anyone can aquire certificate signed by same Public CA so suddenly Provider starts to trust everyone.
Verifying `GolemCertificatesAllowance` in a certificate incoming with Demand will not help. What would need to be verified will be `GolemCertificatesAllowance` of the certificate signing the certificate incoming in a Demand (lets say `app-author` allowance). Alternatively we could just check if the fields like company name are the same between the certificate incoming in Demand and the certificate signing incoming one.

Author: @stranger80 After reading your link, I think, I imagined our role rather as private CA not public CA.
I wanted self-signed certificate, because I wasn't not sure if any CA authority will sign our certificate, if we are adding our custom extensions of unknown (from their perspective) purpose.

On the other side: does having self-signed certificate make us immediately public CA?

And my other concern is: although we could be signed by public CA, we can't have our parent certificate on Provider, because it won't have any `GolemCertificatesAllowance`, so the whole chain would be rejected by Provider.
This relates to your comment either @pwalski

Author: The second thing: I talked with @prekucki and we can't sign our certificate using Multisig anyway, because signature comes from only one holder and contract logic ensures, that all holders agreed to sign.

Author: And the last thing: I'm wondering if we shouldn't use blockchain for storing/handling these certificates.
